## Economics and Strategy

*   **Opportunity cost:** The value of what you have to give up to choose something else.
*   **Creative destruction:** A theory of economic innovation where new production units replace outdated ones in a free-market economy.
*   **Double-entry bookkeeping:** A system of balancing books by using two accounts for every entry, providing a powerful model for understanding economic events.
*   **Comparative advantage:** All actors can mutually benefit from cooperation and trade if they focus on what they are comparatively best at in terms of opportunity cost.
*   **Rent-seeking:** An attempt to make a profit at the expense of others rather than by creating new value.
*   **Switching costs:** The transaction costs or disadvantages a buyer incurs from switching to another seller.
*   **Nash equilibrium:** When participants in a non-cooperative game have no incentive to deviate from their respective equilibrium strategies after considering their opponent's choices.
*   **AD-AS model:** Explains the level of prices and national income through the relationship between aggregate demand and aggregate supply.
*   **Controlling the center:** Controlling the center of something provides greater flexibility and mobility of choices compared to one's competitor.
*   **Specialization:** The process by which participants in a free-market system divide into different sets of skills to increase efficiency.
*   **Intellectual property:** The societal introduction of intellectual property rights has been a huge accelerator of economic progress through various types of protections.
*   **Utility:** Satisfaction levels affect consumer decisions, with the law of diminishing marginal utility describing how initial units carry more utility than additional units.
*   **Elasticity:** The economic measure of how responsive an economic variable is to a change in another, such as price.
*   **Supply and demand:** The main model of price determination in economic theory, explaining how prices settle at equilibrium when demand equals supply.
*   **Deadweight loss:** A loss of economic efficiency caused by supply and demand being out of equilibrium.
*   **Moral hazard:** A situation where either party to an agreement changes its behavior after the contract is completed so that the probabilities no longer apply.
*   **Bottlenecks:** Matter can get clogged if pushed too quickly through a system than what that system can handle.
*   **Bribery:** A form of moral-breaking bottleneck in human systems which is hard to eliminate.
*   **Arbitrage:** Exploiting price differences in identical or similar financial instruments, capitalizing on the imbalance.
*   **Scarcity:** Limited availability of something gives rise to a trade-off.
*   **Mr. Market:** An analogy proposed by Ben Graham imagining the stock market as a manic and not-too-intelligent profile that calls out prices every day.
*   **Fisher effect:** States that the real rate of interest is stable over time so changes in nominal interest rates are the result of changes in expected inflation.
*   **Cancer surgery formula:** The approach of finding anything sound left that can live on its own and cutting away everything else.
*   **Surfing:** The concept that you won't be able to surf if you don't catch the wave, and if you do catch it, you can stay on it for long.
*   **Porter's five forces:** A framework to look at competitive forces in an industry: threat of new entrants, threat of substitutes, bargaining power of customers, bargaining power of suppliers, and competitive rivalry.
*   **Phillips curve:** A historical inverse relationship between rates of unemployment and corresponding rates of rises in wages.
*   **Parity conditions:** Where two or more things are equal to each other, such as in price, rate of exchange, purchasing power, or wages.
*   **Transaction costs:** Costs associated with determining whether the desired good is available, reaching an acceptable agreement, and ensuring compliance.
*   **Founder's syndrome:** The situation where leaders of companies are so emotionally invested that they can't effectively delegate decisions.
*   **Luxury paradox:** More expensive goods are less likely to be used regularly than cheaper alternatives even though the higher price might indicate higher quality.
*   **Winner's curse:** In open cry auctions and bidding wars, the winning bid tends to exceed the intrinsic value of the item won.
*   **Ratchet effect:** During times of crisis, government spending increases but tends to not fall back to pre-crisis levels when the crisis is over.
*   **Iron law of civilization 3.0:** A freely competitive market is constantly self-evolving, and the largest market will eventually become the only one.
*   **Say's law:** Supply creates demand because the income generated by past production is the source of spending that creates demand.
*   **Paradox of choice:** The effect of how eliminating consumer choices can reduce anxiety for users.
*   **Hick's law:** Increasing the number of choices will increase decision time logarithmically.
*   **Free rider problem:** A form of market failure where those who benefit from resources do not pay for them, resulting in under-provision of those goods.
*   **Cockroach theory:** When bad news is revealed, there may be many more related negative events yet to be revealed.
*   **Evolutionary stable strategy:** A strategy in game theory that is impenetrable by competitors once initiated.
*   **Unknown unknowns:** Risks coming from situations that are so out of this world that they are not imagined in advance.
*   **Critical mass:** The minimum amount of something required to sustain itself going forward.
*   **Freemium:** A pricing strategy by which a good or service is offered for free but with a price charged for proprietary features.
*   **Crowdsourcing:** A sourcing model for soliciting ideas or finances from a large group of participants rather than from employees or suppliers.
*   **Diversification:** When multiple uncorrelated subjects move with certain volatilities, splitting interest between them produces lower collective volatility.
*   **3-6-3 rule:** The value of a bank is easier to value based on how efficiently it utilizes paying 3% on savings, loaning at 6%, and leaving at 3 PM.
*   **First-mover and last-mover advantage:** The advantage gained by the initial occupant of a market or, in some cases, by the last-mover who introduces the final development.
*   **Principal-agent problem:** The theory of delegation and accountability between individuals where one party delegates the performance of a task to another.
*   **Market for lemons problem:** The quality of goods traded in a market can degrade in the presence of information asymmetry between buyers and sellers.
*   **Minsky moment:** A sudden collapse of asset values marking the end of a credit cycle or an economic cycle.
*   **Zero to one theory:** A thought experiment stating that technology is vertical progress (0 to 1) while globalization is horizontal progress (0 to n).
*   **The winner's game and the loser's game:** Games should be played as winner's games (outcome depends on player's ability) or loser's games (progress by avoiding mistakes).
*   **Exit, voice, and loyalty model:** A model assessing how a negative change affects actions, with responses being to exit (withdraw) or voice (attempt repair).
*   **Lucas critique:** It's naive to predict the effects of a change in economic policy based on relationships observed in historical data.

## Human Nature and Judgment

*   **Trust:** A fundamental part of human nature that produces increased speed, efficiency, ethical decision making, and decreased costs.
*   **Availability heuristic:** The tendency to judge the frequency of events by the ease with which examples come to mind.
*   **Anchoring:** The tendency to rely too much on an initial piece of information when making subsequent judgments.
*   **Reciprocity:** A social norm of responding to a positive action with another positive action, even if the action received was unwanted.
*   **Envy and jealousy:** Deep-seated human tendencies that drive much of human behavior, as noted by Warren Buffett: "It's not greed that drives the world, but envy."
*   **Denial:** The refusal to accept reality or fact when it's too painful to bear, distorting it until it's bearable.
*   **Stress:** A biological response triggered by perceiving a threat or major challenge, activating the fight-or-flight response.
*   **Social proof:** The tendency to follow the actions of others, especially in ambiguous situations, as demonstrated by the crosswalk study.
*   **Framing:** The way a question or situation is framed can determine your response and lead to actions based on positive or negative connotations.
*   **Mental accounting:** A tendency to divide money into different pots and treat them separately based on subjective criteria.
*   **Pavlovian association:** A learning procedure of pairing a stimulus with a conditioned response, as demonstrated by Pavlov's dogs.
*   **Operant conditioning:** A method of learning through rewards and punishment that takes place in many natural and structured settings.
*   **Commitment and consistency bias:** A tendency to want to be consistent with one's prior actions, creating reluctance to change course once chosen.
*   **Sunk costs:** The tendency to continue an endeavor due to resources already invested, even though cutting losses might be wiser.
*   **Liking tendency:** People prefer to say yes to requests from those they know and like, making similarity a powerful influence tool.
*   **Stereotyping:** A tendency to over-generalize a population or class of people, related to the availability heuristic.
*   **Groupthink:** The desire for harmony in a group can result in irrational or dysfunctional decision-making outcomes.
*   **Authority bias:** The behavioral tendency to attribute greater weight and accuracy to the opinion of someone with authority.
*   **First-conclusion bias:** A tendency to settle on the first information or conclusion adopted for a problem, remaining resistant to alternatives.
*   **Confirmation bias:** The tendency to interpret situations or seek evidence that confirms pre-existing beliefs.
*   **Hindsight bias:** The tendency to overestimate one's ability to have predicted an outcome that couldn't possibly have been predicted.
*   **Survivorship bias:** A form of selection bias where the survivors of a particular subject are disproportionately evaluated.
*   **Curse of knowledge:** Once you learn something, you find it hard to imagine what it was like not to know it.
*   **Reductive bias:** The need to treat non-linear complex systems as if they are linear, causing mistakes from mismatched reality.
*   **Incentives:** People do what they're incentivized to do, generally producing the outcome that is rewarded.
*   **Representativeness heuristic:** The tendency to let the similarity of objects or events confuse one's thinking about the probability of an outcome.
*   **Narrative fallacy:** Because we have a strong tendency to make sense of cause and effect, stories help us make sense of the world but can cause errors.
*   **Bizarreness effect:** Bizarre or controversial information is easier to recall than what is common.
*   **Baader-Meinhof phenomenon:** Once something has recently come to your attention, it suddenly seems to appear with improbable frequency.
*   **Cobra effect:** When an attempted solution to a problem makes the very problem worse due to feedback loops and linear thinking.
*   **Boomerang effect:** An unintended consequence where people being persuaded to do one thing turn around to the opposite.
*   **Curiosity instinct:** Curiosity opens up for exploration, investigation, and learning, essential for science, technology, and company survival.
*   **Language instinct:** Humans are born with an innate capacity for language, showing much about our cognitive organization.
*   **Hasty generalization:** The human mind tends to generalize based on rules from a sample set of data, sometimes leading to overgeneralization.
*   **Relative satisfaction:** The tendency to determine your own level of satisfaction by comparing circumstances to others'.
*   **Kantian fairness:** The ethical theory that for an action to be permissible, it must be possible to apply it to all people without contradiction.
*   **Fundamental attribution error:** The tendency to overemphasize personal characteristics and ignore situational factors when judging others' behavior.
*   **Action bias:** Humans tend to act even when no action is needed, as waiting and watching is torture.
*   **Principle of least effort:** Animals, humans, and machines naturally seek the path of least resistance, with effort declining as minimum results are attained.
*   **Cognitive dissonance:** The effect of simultaneously trying to believe two incompatible things at the same time.
*   **Hard-easy effect:** We tend to overestimate our ability to do something hard and underestimate our ability to do something easy.
*   **Focusing effect:** The tendency to put too much emphasis on limited factors that don't matter much as part of a larger system.
*   **Recency:** The tendency to weigh recent information more heavily because it seems more vivid, even if less important.
*   **Planning fallacy:** Tasks often take longer than expected, underestimating time, costs, and risks due to optimism bias.
*   **Reputation fragility:** As Warren Buffett says: "It takes 20 years to build a reputation and 5 minutes to ruin it."
*   **Noise bottleneck:** When more sampling of something decreases the signal-to-noise relation, increasing randomness and decreasing sound conclusions.
*   **Keynesian beauty contest:** An action based not on one's perception but an inference of what one thinks the public perception will be.
*   **Serpico effect:** The tendency to rationalize an action because everyone else is doing it, named after whistleblower Frank Serpico.
*   **Depressive realism:** A hypothesis stating that depressed people make more realistic inferences than non-depressed people.
*   **Skill compensation:** People who are relatively good at one thing might tend to be relatively poor at another due to trade-offs in skill development.
*   **Compassion face:** The tendency to have more compassion for victims within small groups than larger groups because they're easier to identify.
*   **Three men make a tiger:** The tendency to accept absurd information as long as it is repeated enough times by enough people.
*   **Buridan's ass:** A type of decision paralysis where two equally good options lead to no decision, named after philosopher Jean Buridan.
*   **Imposter syndrome:** The fear of being exposed as less talented than one's surroundings think about one.
*   **Semmelweis effect:** The tendency to reject new evidence because it contradicts established norms, beliefs, or paradigms.
*   **False-consensus effect:** The tendency to erroneously believe that your views or beliefs are more widely held than they are.
*   **McNamara fallacy:** The belief that rational decisions are made solely based on quantitative evidence, ignoring all other factors.
*   **Courtesy bias:** The resistance to giving an honest opinion due to a desire not to offend the person or organization responding.
*   **Lucid fallacy:** The tendency to falsely associate simulations with real life, failing to account for chaos in future events.
*   **Dunning-Kruger:** When people with beginning-level competencies tend to overestimate their abilities, not recognizing their limits.
*   **Abilene paradox:** When a group decides to make a decision that is counter to the thoughts and feelings of its members due to failed communication.
*   **In-group favoritism:** The inclination to give preference to people within your social group, such as in nepotism.
*   **Collective narcissism:** The tendency to exaggerate the positive image and importance of a group that you belong to.
*   **Normalcy bias:** The tendency to believe threats and disasters are not probable due to a belief that things will remain as they always have.
*   **Texas sharpshooter fallacy:** The action of picking the target after making the shot, making it impossible to miss, using the same data to construct and test.
*   **Plain folks fallacy:** A logical fallacy involving speakers attempting to convince an audience that they and their ideas are "of the people."
*   **Poisoning the well:** The act of presenting negative information that is irrelevant before presenting an argument, making it seem untrustworthy.
*   **Appeal to consequences:** An argument that attempts to prove a hypothesis true or false because the consequences are desirable or undesirable.
*   **Behavioral inevitability:** The notion that human behavior, and its inherent biases, will always remain.
*   **Self-handicapping:** The tendency to resist doing something because of a worry that failing might put a dent in one's self-esteem.
*   **False uniqueness effect:** An attributional cognitive error of assuming that one's qualities and traits are unique when in reality they are not.
*   **Backfiring effect:** The tendency to enforce one's existing beliefs when presented with disconfirming evidence.
*   **Positive illusions:** A form of self-deception that causes individuals to think inflatedly about themselves to avoid discomfort or raise self-esteem.
*   **Ironic process theory:** The psychological process of attempting to suppress certain thoughts, making those thoughts more likely to resurface.
*   **Aumann's agreement theorem:** The notion that two rational people in an opposing argument can't conclude by agreeing to disagree with common knowledge.
*   **Ostrich effect:** The tendency to avoid opposing information to what one desperately wants to be right, like an ostrich burying its head.
*   **Bounded rationality:** Limits to the capacity of the human mind make it impossible to contain all information, limiting rationality.
*   **Fluency heuristic:** The tendency to believe more in ideas that are easy to explain rather than those that are hard to comprehend.
*   **Persian messenger syndrome:** The act of blaming the bearer of negative news, causing leaders to get in a cocoon of unreality.
*   **Okrent's law:** The pursuit of balance can create imbalance because sometimes something is true.
*   **Vierordt's law:** Humans perceive time at different magnitudes over different durations, underestimating long periods and overestimating short ones.
*   **Cunningham's law:** The best way to get the right answer on the Internet is not to ask a question but to post the wrong answer.
*   **Tyranny of small decisions:** A situation where small, individually rational decisions create a path dependence that might negatively alter subsequent decisions.
*   **Hyperbolic discounting:** The tendency to show a higher preference for the reward that comes sooner rather than later.
*   **Delayed gratification:** Resisting the temptation of an immediate reward in preference for a later reward.
*   **Observer effect:** A situation where an individual is being observed, but the very observation alters that individual's actions.
*   **Golem effect:** Related to the observer effect, performance tends to decline when supervisors have low expectations of one's abilities.
*   **Maslow's hierarchy of needs:** A motivational theory stating that humans have five categories of needs in order: physiological, safety, love, esteem, and self-actualization.
*   **Bystander effect:** People are less likely to help a victim when others are present, with the likelihood decreasing as the number of bystanders increases.
*   **Hot hand fallacy:** The positive expectation that an event will occur that has already been preceded by the same event, regardless of historical record.
*   **Gambler's fallacy:** The mistaken belief that a run of specific results in a random process makes it less or more likely to occur the next time.
*   **Acton's law:** Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
*   **Brandolini's law:** The amount of energy needed to refute bullshit is an order of magnitude larger than to produce it.
*   **Peltzman's law:** People are more likely to engage in risky behavior when security measures have been mandated.

## Numeracy and Interpretation

*   **Power laws:** When a relative change in one quantity results in a proportional relative change in the other quantity, with the Pareto principle as a type.
*   **Permutations and combinations:** The mathematics of counting and arranging objects, essential for understanding practical probabilities in the world.
*   **Algebra:** The study and manipulation of mathematical symbols to demonstrate equivalence or inequivalence of subjects.
*   **Multiplying by zero:** Any number multiplied by zero becomes zero, which can be fatal when trying to compound returns.
*   **Randomness:** Randomness is present everywhere but often doesn't fit how we think about the world, leading to erroneous pattern-seeking.
*   **Stochastic processes:** A family of random variables on the same probability space, such as Brownian motion and random walk theory.
*   **Gambler's ruin:** Playing a negative-probability game persistently enough guarantees going broke, even with positive expected value on each bet.
*   **Compounding:** A powerful force when interest is regularly added to the sum which earned interest on the previous sum, affecting knowledge and relationships too.
*   **Churn:** A form of entropy measuring the number of people or items moving out of a collective group over a specified period.
*   **Law of large numbers:** The average of results from many events should be close to the expected value, getting closer as more events occur.
*   **Probability distributions:** Statistical functions describing all possible values and likelihoods that a random variable can take within a given range.
*   **Central limit theorem:** If you add many independent random variables, the sum will tend toward a normal distribution regardless of original distributions.
*   **Confidence interval:** The measure explaining to what degree a sample estimate might explain the true value of a parameter when tested on a population.
*   **Mean regression:** When several observations follow the law of large numbers, extreme measurements tend to be closer to the average on subsequent measurements.
*   **Order of magnitude:** A quantitative measure used to make very approximate comparisons, with one order of magnitude being about ten times larger.
*   **Kelly criterion:** A formula for optimal bet sizing based on the better's edge and odds of winning, maximizing wealth growth without risking ruin.
*   **J-curve:** An effect where a curve initially falls, then steeply rises above the starting point, applied in currency devaluation and private equity.
*   **Base rate neglect:** A tendency to ignore the a priori probability of something by putting heavier weight on appealing information about an individual case.
*   **Anscombe's quartet:** When presumably identical sets of numbers do not at all look identical when graphed, showing numerical calculations are exact but graphs are rough.
*   **Selection bias:** An experimental error when sample data is not representative of the population as a whole.
*   **Berkson's paradox:** A case where conditional probability and correlations are counterintuitive due to a sampling or selection bias.
*   **Apophenia:** A psychological phenomenon where random and meaningless impressions are perceived as meaningful, also called patternicity.
*   **Probability neglect:** The tendency to disregard probability in decision making under uncertainty, either neglecting small risks or hugely overrating them.
*   **Ergodicity:** A case where population probabilities don't apply to individual events but are evened out as time passes.
*   **Moral luck:** The act of praising a person for a good deed they didn't have full control over.
*   **Friendship paradox:** Most people have fewer friends than their friends have, on average, due to a sampling bias where people with more friends are more likely to be your friends.
*   **Clustering illusions:** Falsely assuming that streaks or clusters in random data indicate a non-random distribution.
*   **Nonlinearity:** A situation where there is not a straight-line relationship between variables, with output not proportional to input change.
*   **Moderation:** A situation where the relationship between two variables depends on a third variable.
*   **Denomination effect:** Even though a $50 bill has the same value as 10 $5 bills, we tend to feel that the 10 bills are worth less.
*   **Woozle effect:** When frequent citation of previous information that lacks evidence misleads individuals into believing it's evidence.
*   **Scientific method:** An empirical method of acquiring knowledge through systematic observation, measurement, and experiment.
*   **Proxy:** A variable that serves instead of an immeasurable other variable, needing to be close to the replaced value.
*   **Inflection point:** A point on a curve at which the curve changes from being concave to convex, or vice versa.
*   **Simpson's paradox:** A case where a certain trend seems evident in different groups of data but is not evident when these groups are combined.
*   **Surface area:** The amount of space that is outside of a solid object, with a non-linear relationship to volume.
*   **Maxima and minima:** The highest and lowest points of value in a function, collectively known as extrema.
*   **Sensitivity analysis:** A method of assessing the stability of research results by changing conditions in each variable.
*   **Benford's law:** Describes how different figures are distributed as first figures in statistics, with 1 appearing as the first digit 30.1% of the time.
*   **Black swans:** Rare events that have a large impact, are difficult to predict, and are beyond normal estimates.
*   **Goodhart's law:** When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure as people optimize for that objective regardless of consequences.

## Thinking

*   **Decision trees:** A tree-like visualization of how action leads to another series of possible consequences and outcomes.
*   **Probabilistic thinking:** Thinking in terms of probabilities, one of the most critical traits and skills to adopt for understanding the world.
*   **Second-order thinking:** Thinking in terms of effects and the effects of those effects, asking "and then what?"
*   **Bayesian updating:** The method of updating a probability estimate for a hypothesis as new evidence or information becomes available.
*   **Bloom's taxonomy:** A set of three hierarchical orders of thinking about any subject in terms of levels: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor.
*   **Circle of competence:** Moving out of one's area of expertise is prone to blind spots, making it important to recognize and stay within one's competence.
*   **First principles:** The basic assumptions that can't be deduced any further in a specific field, breaking down problems to essential elements.
*   **Thought experiment:** An imaginary experiment used to solve difficult problems and their potential consequences.
*   **Inversion:** A thinking tool to get to the root of a problem by thinking of it in reverse, as advised by Carl Jacobi.
*   **5 whys:** Asking yourself 5 whys about a subject is a strategy to push yourself to find the truth.
*   **Occam's razor:** The idea of preferring the theory with the fewest assumptions when all else is equal.
*   **Hanlon's razor:** Never attribute to malice that which can be adequately explained by stupidity.
*   **Maslow's hammer:** If all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail, also known as the law of the instrument.
*   **Divergent thinking vs convergent thinking:** Divergent thinking explores multiple possible solutions while convergent thinking figures out a concrete solution.
*   **Chronological snobbery:** The argument that the stuff of earlier times is inferior to that of the present simply due to societal progress.
*   **Weasel words:** The illusion that someone has given a clear answer when they've said something inconclusive or vague.
*   **Knightian uncertainty:** Risk applies to situations with unknown outcomes but measurable probabilities, while uncertainty applies when probabilities can't be set.
*   **Map-territory relation:** The relationship between an object and a representation of that object is always abstract, like a map vs the territory.
*   **All models are wrong:** An aphorism stating that all models are wrong, but some are useful, applicable to all scientific models.
*   **Middle ground fallacy:** The fallacy of compromising two opposing views to land on the middle ground just because it's the middle ground.
*   **Eisenhower matrix:** A method to decide on and prioritize tasks by urgency and importance, sorting out less urgent tasks to delegate or not do.
*   **Systemics:** The study of systems, how they work, how they're related to larger systems, and how they break down or are prone to bottlenecks.
*   **Lateral thinking:** A method of thinking across otherwise irreconcilable disciplines to arrive at solutions that can't be reached via deductive means.
*   **Historical wisdom:** Studying the past intensely to understand the present and future because the past makes up the vast majority of events.
*   **Paradigm shift:** When an important change occurs that replaces the usual way of thinking about or doing something.
*   **Abduction:** A term related to both induction and deduction, where the researcher moves between theory and empiricism to allow understanding to emerge.
*   **Chauffeur knowledge:** The distinction between real knowledge and merely repeating what one has learned, as illustrated by Max Planck and his chauffeur.
*   **Pascal's wager:** An argument that it's always a better "bet" to believe in God because the expected value of believing is greater than not believing.
*   **Alder's law:** If something cannot be settled by experiment then it is not worthy of debate.

## Systems

*   **Scale:** As a system performs more work, it acquires efficiencies but also inefficiencies like bureaucracy, with scale advantages creating durable moats.
*   **Pareto rule:** The 80-20 rule stating that for many situations, roughly 80% of effects come from 20% of causes.
*   **Law of diminishing returns:** Adding more of one factor of production will, at a certain point, result in lower incremental per-unit returns.
*   **Algorithms:** A way to solve a problem by way of termination, consisting of sets of rules to complete a task in a series of steps.
*   **Margin of safety:** Leaving yourself an enormous margin when making decisions, as in building a bridge to carry 30,000 pounds but driving 10,000-pound trucks.
*   **Network effects:** The value of a network is driven by the number of users, sometimes turning into a winner-take-all scenario.
*   **Tipping point:** The point at which a product or trend goes viral, introduced by Malcolm Gladwell with three variables: the law of the few, stickiness, and context.
*   **Entropy:** A measure of the number of possible arrangements the atoms in a system can have, essentially uncertainty or randomness.
*   **Second law of thermodynamics:** The total entropy of an isolated system will inevitably increase over time and will only remain still if all processes are reversible.
*   **Principle of minimum energy:** For a closed system with fixed entropy, the total energy is minimized at equilibrium.
*   **Feedback loops:** When the outcome of a system amplifies and reinforces the system itself in either a positive or negative fashion.
*   **Reflexivity:** A theory that feedback loops between expectations and economic fundamentals can cause price developments that deviate from equilibrium.
*   **Complex adaptive systems:** A perfect understanding of individual parts doesn't convey understanding of the system's behavior as a whole, like cities or markets.
*   **Pari-mutuel systems:** Betting systems where all bets are placed in a pool and payoff odds are calculated by sharing the pool among winning bets.
*   **Butterfly effect:** A phenomenon where a small change in an initial condition can have a huge effect on a future condition.
*   **Preferential attachment:** When what is popular or perceived as better grows even more than what is less popular, feeding network effects.
*   **Emergence:** When the sum of something cannot be explained by simple additions of its components, e.g. when the sum is greater than the parts.
*   **Irreducibility:** When a system or object is incapable of being reduced, diminished, or simplified further.
*   **Tragedy of the commons:** When a depletable resource is shared in a system where users act in self-interest, it will tend to be depleted.
*   **Gresham's law:** "Bad money drives out good" - when two forms of money are in circulation, the one perceived as more valuable will be hoarded.
*   **Antifragility:** Some things benefit from shocks and thrive when exposed to volatility, randomness, and stressors, getting better rather than just resilient.
*   **Redundancy:** The concept of backup systems in engineering, duplicating critical components to increase reliability.
*   **Via negative:** The action of improving a system by removing elements from it, as in Warren Buffett's 5-25 rule.
*   **Lindy effect:** Non-perishable objects or technologies are expected to live proportionally to their current age.
*   **Bullwhip effect:** A chain reaction where an initial reaction turns to bigger reactions later due to lack of complete information about expectations.
*   **Parkinson's law:** Work expands to fill the time available for its completion.
*   **Symmetry of ignorance:** When a problem is so difficult that every participant attempting to solve it is shooting in the dark with no experts.
*   **Base rates:** The a priori probability of an activity about to be done, e.g. the success rate of everyone who's done what you're about to try.
*   **System justification theory:** People tolerate unjust and inefficient systems if their incentives are aligned to defend or maintain them.
*   **Sturgeon's law:** An adage cited as ninety percent of everything is crap, representing that most work in any field is of low quality.
*   **Ringelmann effect:** As a group increases in members, individuals tend to become increasingly less productive due to reduced individual impact.
*   **Planck's principle:** A new scientific truth doesn't triumph by convincing opponents but because opponents eventually die and a new generation grows up.
*   **Group attribution error:** Falsely assuming that the views and decision outcomes of a collective group reflect the view of each member.
*   **90-9-1 rule:** In social media, only 1% actively create content, 9% participate by commenting or sharing, and 90% watch without responding.
*   **Braess' paradox:** Adding a road to a congested traffic network can make traffic worse due to shortcuts becoming popular and overcrowded.
*   **Perfect solution fallacy:** A false dichotomy suggesting that a perfect solution exists and courses of action should be rejected if a small part of the problem remains.
*   **Peter principle:** Employees rise in an organization through promotion until they end up in a position in which they are incompetent.
*   **Foundational species:** Species that have a pillar role in supporting an ecosystem, without which many other species couldn't sustain existence.
*   **Google Scholar effect:** Google Scholar's algorithm enhances preferential attachment as highly cited papers gain more citations while new papers get less attention.
*   **Rebound effect:** When efficiency improvements don't lead to proportional reductions in resource use because behavior changes.
*   **Murphy's law:** All that can happen, will happen.
*   **Campbell's law:** The more any quantitative social indicator is used for decision-making, the more subject it will be to corruption pressures.
*   **Path dependence:** The set of decisions people face is limited by decisions they've made in the past, with history mattering for future options.
*   **Externality:** When a third party is subject to the cost or benefit that they didn't have any control over, like pollution or attractive houses.
*   **Open platform vs closed platform:** An open platform can be altered in ways the creator didn't intend, while a closed platform keeps the creator in control.
*   **Moore's law:** The observation that the number of transistors on a microchip doubles roughly every two years while the cost of computers is halved.
*   **Metcalfe's law:** The value of a communication system grows proportionally to the square of the number of users of the system.
*   **Theory of constraints:** Any manageable system is limited to achieving its goals by a very small number of constraints, with always at least one constraint.
*   **Amara's law:** Technology is overestimated in the short run and underestimated in the long run.

## Biological World

*   **Incentives:** Contingent encouragers that motivate humans and animals to do certain actions, based on the idea that people act in their self-interest.
*   **Ecosystems:** A complete environment in nature with all living organisms and non-living elements, where every organism has relationships with its environment.
*   **Niches:** In ecosystems, a participant might flourish more in a niche to which it is adapted than it would any other way.
*   **Evolution by natural selection:** The process by which organisms change over time as a result of changes in heritable physical or behavioral traits.
*   **Cooperation:** When organisms find a common good to work for, which is greater than their selfish benefits, they tend to cooperate toward that good.
*   **Prisoner's dilemma:** A problem where two individuals acting in self-interest don't create an optimal outcome, choosing to protect themselves at the other's expense.
*   **Adaptation:** Changes in the structure, function, or behavior of living organisms act to increase their adaptation to the environment.
*   **Red queen effect:** Species must continuously adapt and evolve to pass on genes and resist extinction when other species are evolving.
*   **Replication:** The biochemical process of copying DNA in a cell, a prerequisite for successful cell division.
*   **Hedonic treadmill:** People repeatedly return to their baseline level of happiness despite major positive or negative events or life changes.
*   **Self-preservation:** The behavior that ensures survival through pain and fear, integral parts of all living organisms.
*   **Reward system:** Neural structures responsible for incentive salience, associative learning, and emotions like joy and euphoria, sometimes hijacked by addictions.
*   **Exaptation:** Evolution allows traits originally meant for one purpose to enlist for a new main purpose, with current use not explaining historical origin.
*   **Hormesis:** Small doses of something can be beneficial but dangerous or deadly if applied at too large doses - when less is more.
*   **Dunbar's number:** Humans can maintain around 150 social relationships, based on the correlation between primate brain size and average social group size.
*   **Epidemic models:** Models used to study and predict epidemics of infectious diseases, also applicable to understanding herd behavior in other domains.
*   **Pollyanna principle:** It's easier to remember pleasant things than bad ones, with the mind tending to focus on optimism subconsciously.
*   **Declinism:** The belief that society is heading towards decline by putting stronger emphasis on negatives per the Pollyanna principle.
*   **Empathy gap:** Underestimating how behavior is affected by one's mental state when not currently in that mental state.
*   **Meat paradox:** Individuals can adapt their attitude to action, caring less about cows' well-being when they have just eaten beef jerky.
*   **Emotional contagion:** Empathy acts in transferring emotions from some individuals to others through observation, with happiness and misery loving company.
*   **Punctuated equilibrium:** Once species appear in the fossil record, they become stable, showing little evolutionary change for most of their geological history.
*   **Luck surface area:** The amount of serendipity in your life is directly proportional to doing something you're passionate about combined with communicating it to others.
*   **Tribalism:** The division into or support for a tribe or tribes, characterized by tribal loyalty over loyalty to friends, country, or other social groups.

## Physical World

*   **Velocity:** A vector describing how far and in which direction something moves per unit of time, with speed being the scalar length of this vector.
*   **Relativity:** The natural world allows no ruling frames of reference, with laws of physics being the same for everyone moving at constant speed.
*   **Activation energy:** The energy needed to produce a certain reaction, like sparks providing activation energy to initiate combustion in a Bunsen burner.
*   **Catalysts:** A substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction without itself being converted or consumed by the reaction.
*   **Leverage:** A sensitive area where, depending on application, its force might be incredibly powerful or devastating, as Archimedes noted.
*   **Inertia:** All things with even rectilinear speed will continue moving in that direction until affected by an external force.
*   **Kinetics:** A sub-area of mechanics describing changes in movement quantities under the influence of forces, taking into account the mass of the moving body.
*   **Alloying:** When a metal is combined with other substances, it can create a new metal with superior properties like strength or hardness.
*   **Viscosity:** The inertia of a liquid, gas, or plasma—or its internal friction—with water having lower viscosity than honey.
*   **Irreversibility:** A concept in thermodynamics meaning a system's state cannot be precisely restored to its initial state without spending energy.
*   **Clark's third law:** Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic, and for every expert, there is an equal and opposite expert.
*   **Flywheel:** A mechanical device that can retain kinetic energy in rotation over time, with the ability to maintain a steady direction of its axis.
*   **Half-life:** The time elapsed before an exponentially decreasing size is halved, applied to decay processes like radioactive decay.
*   **Heisenberg uncertainty principle:** Certain pairs of physical magnitudes cannot be determined with arbitrary accuracy, like position and momentum of a particle.
*   **Atomism:** The ancient theory that the world is made up of countless small particles, atoms, separated by voids, constituting the basic substance of the world.
*   **Autocatalysis:** A chemical reaction in which an end product acts as a catalyst for the reaction, accelerating it as long as sufficient starting materials are available.
*   **Recursion:** When something is defined in terms of itself, used in various disciplines from linguistics to computer science.
*   **Electromagnetism:** The force that gives rise to most everyday phenomena, such as induction, friction, normal force, and chemical reactions.
*   **Quantum mechanics:** A physical theory describing properties and laws of states and processes in matter at atomic and smaller sizes.
*   **Shannon-Hartley law:** A formula for calculating transmission capacity over any communication channel, providing the theoretical maximum achievable capacity.

## Military and War

*   **Asymmetric war:** A type of warfare where two parties have different military capabilities or methods, with the weak party taking advantage of special advantages.
*   **Attrition warfare:** Warfare where warring parties are so strong that an end can only be reached through extended mutual depletion of resources.
*   **Two-front war:** Parties prefer to fight on one front only, as another front usually weakens both fronts by making it difficult to move forces between them.
*   **Choke point:** A small or narrow area that a larger number of soldiers cannot pass at the same time, making them easier to defeat by a less powerful enemy.
*   **Counterinsurgency:** Various tactics and strategies used to combat armed insurgency, blending civilian and military efforts to contain insurgency and address root causes.
*   **Mutually assured destruction:** A strategic doctrine implying that if one party uses nuclear weapons, it destroys both parties, based on theories of terror balance.
*   **Guerilla warfare:** An organized, armed struggle intended to influence or govern a state government, classified differently by opposing sides.
*   **Fighting the last war:** The act of using strategies or tactics that worked successfully in the past but are no longer useful.
*   **Empty fort strategy:** Consists of convincing the opponent that an empty fortification is full of hidden soldiers or traps, inducing the enemy to retreat.
*   **Potemkin village:** A construction built solely to deceive others into thinking that a situation is better than it really is.
*   **Trojan horse:** A strategy in which a warring party is lured into letting the enemy behind their defenses.
*   **Blitzkrieg:** A strategy intended to prevent conflict escalation through rapid operational victory.
*   **Decapitation:** A massive strategic attack on the opponent's political and military leadership structures to eliminate or reduce their ability to counterattack.
*   **Defeat in detail:** Bringing a large portion of one's force to attack small enemy units in sequence rather than engaging the bulk at once.
*   **Pincer ambush:** A strategy in which the opponent is enclosed by coordinated attacks around both flanks, preventing retreat.
*   **Shock and awe:** A strategy of using overwhelming power to achieve rapid dominance over the enemy.
*   **Swarming:** Use of a decentralized force against an opponent, emphasizing mobility, communication, unit autonomy, and coordination.
*   **Turning movement:** A strategy allowing an attacking force to reach the opposing rear guard by separating defenders from their main defensive positions.
*   **Win without fighting:** Sun Tzu's argument that a brilliant general could win without killing anybody.
*   **Defense in depth:** A strategy where defending side places units to gradually absorb the strength of an attacking enemy.
*   **Fortification:** A semi-permanent or permanent defensive structure that gives physical protection to a military unit.
*   **Fabian strategy:** A strategy aiming to avoid field battles and frontal attacks by wearing out the opponent through disruptions in logistics or morale.
*   **Scorched earth:** A tactic consisting of destroying resources during a retreat to prevent them from falling into enemy hands.
*   **Turtling:** Continuous reinforcement of the military front until full strength is reached, followed by an attack with the now-superior force.

## Political Failure

*   **Chilling effect:** The reluctance or unwillingness to exercise one's right due to fear of legal sanctions.
*   **Third rail of politics:** A metaphor for any subject so controversial that it's "untouchable" and any politician approaching it suffers politically.
*   **Regulatory capture:** A form of political corruption where a government body represents commercial or special interests rather than society.
*   **State capture:** A type of systemic political corruption where private interests significantly influence a state's decision-making processes.
*   **Shirky principle:** Institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are the solution.

## Rule of Law

*   **Burden of proof:** A party's obligation to present evidence of a claim in a conflict.
*   **Common law:** Legal systems where courts have legislative functions, able to interpret and create law through precedents.
*   **Precedents:** Prior judgments, decisions, or rulings used as a rule or guide in later cases with similar circumstances.
*   **Due process:** A procedural legal principle ensuring everyone has the right to certain minimum guarantees for a fair and equitable result.
*   **Duty of care:** An obligation to pay attention and reasonable care required by law while performing acts that could foreseeably harm others.
*   **Good faith:** A party's excusable ignorance of a particular relationship, assessed by what a sensible person would have done in the same situation.
*   **Negligence:** When something is caused by carelessness amongst specified circumstances.
*   **Presumption of innocence:** The basic principle that a person suspected of a crime has the right to be regarded as innocent until proved guilty.
*   **Reasonable doubt:** Evidence beyond reasonable doubt is the standard required to validate a criminal conviction in most prosecution systems.